---
layout: post
title: "0.0 Tech mediated time(s)"
subtitle: "Time used to be tik-tok-tik-tok, now TikTok takes up all our time, how did this happen?"
permalink: /00/
date: 2021-02-07
cover-img: /images/series-00.jpg
thumbnail-img: /images/series-00.jpg
share-img: /images/series-00.jpg
show_excerpt: false
tags: [time]

---

TikTok used to be the sound of clocks, has now become synonymous to short dancing videos/memes on an infinite scroll. This phenomenon best captures the way time has changed in its meaning to us as a result of tech automation.

## Choosing to automate toward automation choosing us

Washing machines save time, doomscrolling steals our time. Two very different expressions of our technological practice of time -- from outsourcing to a machine/device/algo (the time to do something we don't want), to giving up your ownmost time towards the habitual patterns of flicking, swapping, scrolling, binging -- from choosing to automate toward automation choosing you. 

Of course such strict dichotomies do not really exist in everyday life, things are more complicated, nuanced, in a flux. Then contrast these two tech practices of time to playing a video game where we have to deliberate on our choices while being under the influence of the game mechanics, among other things such as interactung with other players, keeping the meatspace rea;lity at bay so as to stay focused.

Digging into the differing practices of *time* that tech enframes is key to understanding how technology plays us as we play its part in and as our everyday lives. Internal contradictions abound: Obsessively saving time leads to eventually loosing the ability to value the time we have, thereby we end up loosing all the freed up time we get courtsey automation. 

As automation allows us to save time via outsourcing, we are left with more free time to do what we rather desire to do. I automated the washing of the clothes with the washing machine, which freed up my time so I can now write this essay now. Now what if we used the washing machine for the sake of using the washing machine, not that we had dirty laundry, that would lead to wasting the time to operate the machine instead of saving any time.

When we automate merely out of habit, not coz we have a purpose outside of the automation, such as when we keep scrolling just because we are sitting on the toilet seat, automation will only leave us feeling bored. In which case, we will be, out of that habit, looking for technological ways to make that freed up time engaging, or entertaining or at least, unconscious (i.e., numb oneself from feeling the boredom). Out comes the need for the kind of automation that exists in bing watching, doomscrolling, wiki rabbit holing, one that takes away all that freed up time. 

Automation makes boredom ever more boring. When automation lacks any purpose beyond itself, boredom ensues. In fact, the lack of purpose, is a sign of an already existsing state of boredom in that type of an urge to automate in the first place. *What starts in boredom ends in boredom.* Automation helps it persist longer with short term respites in every hit/reward under the gamifications of social media apps. 

(Bored as in: freeing the time to do something without having anything to do, that liminal space where we are still waiting for the next desire to strike, feeling the desire to have a desire without which we are stuck with all the free time. (For even if a task is demanding but we don't like it, we are not bored, we are frustated, angry even.)

Not all urges to automate is born in boredom, however. Such as, when we have a genuine purpose that escapes the confines of what is being or what is to be, automated. As was the book reading beyond the washing clothes example.

Unless we automate with a purpose beyond the technological one, we will always find that we suddenly do not know what to do with the time we regained. If automation is not used as a means to an end beyond tech, we will end up in the inifinite regress of automating the automated time. 

The benefits of automation starts contradicting itself when taken to an extreme. Automating X to save time to do Y, but then automating Y to save time to do Z, and if this goes on ad inifnitum, to what extent will be automating till we find that thing so worthy of our time that we say 'no, thank you, I will do it manually'. 

Software is eating the world -- translates to: our will to automate is a force of habit now. Out of habit, we will end up automating things that only later we will realize was a mistake, but even then we will not be able to stop it the next time around coz... Habit! You can always hire a bot/avator to smell the roses on your behalf.

Saving money so obsessively that you end up not going to the hospital for saving money, ultimately dying with more money to spend under all the rugs in your house. That is the irony of automation taken to an extreme.


## Automation is a viral infection

Difficult to automate a few aspects of time, coz the automated parts of life keep reminding the manual of what it's missing out. The force of nature that is automation now with tech all around us keeps coming back. 'Automation can only work when everything gets automated' -- that's the secret message behind the tech mediated times we live in. For [Automation is a viral infection](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgS1Lwr8gq8), it does not just infect a single aspect of our life by opening a different experience of time for us, but everything that it touches and it desires to touch more and more. This is the lure of saving-time, degen time, gamified apps.

Saving so much time to the point of all time in one's life leads to having no life left as there being no time left for us to deliberately experience in all its manual details as a living and thinking subject.  

Automation robs us of deliberative time. 

Even if we want to take breaks, from time to time, from such technological occupation of time, it remains out of reach, since this very break happens to be happening in time ('*once* am done with this tweet, no more phone'), about time ('I need the break to have the time to finish this book'), against time ('running after time', 'time to catch up with all my notifications'), that is, our being-in-time remains incapable of escaping its own blind spot regarding its relationship to time; like an eye trying to see its own iris, in its desire to directly see it without the mediation of a mirror — to have an immediate view of itself will always already escape itself. This is an itch that we can not scratch although we do feel under crawling deep under our skin, when we are unable to sleep, suffering from a lack of attention, feeling fidgety, exhausted after a long scroll. 

Our imagined time from the future of when we will finally be free haunts us, one that being the future, will always stay there, and because of which, never ceasing to haunt us, and thus, the specter of the Luddites, of the 'off the grid' lifestyle, or the digital detox, haunts every moment our technologically mediated experience of time. This deep despair necessarily and precisely creates the background for imagining an impossible way out, as a wild phantasy, as an imagined impossible — in the form of having infinite time to live by removing death, or uploading our consciousness to a digital cloud, or extending our human capacities with digital/robotic appendages. 


## On the epistemic hegemony of the clock measurable time

As long as all time is measured and framed in terms of clock-only measurable time, it provides for insufficient means to argue against automation since it uses as its justification the promise of 'saving time' where this time in question is only of the clock-measurable type. In turn, this delegitimizes, as its first principle, our subjective variances — in speed (slow when in pain, fast when excited), in direction (backwards when we are lost in memories, in many places at once when in moments of conflict), in texture (smooth in a pleasant moment, rough in a discursive one) — in our experience of time based on mood and other factors. These are all subjective modes of perceiving time, all of which are discounted in our technical age as being illusions, as being an aspect of our mind, not a reflection of the objective universe. We would rather put our faith in the clock to tell us and reprimand ourselves when we feel impatient or regretful or one of many of these modalities of time. 

With time, we have the first instance of humans trusting a machine, the clock, to tell the reality of something, time in this case, over that of our human perception of it. That is why the clock is central to understanding the history of technology, as it relates to its dominance on all our life right now. 

The rhythmic movement that is key to the clock mechanism, is reflected in many other movements through out our lives, such as the breathing in and out, day and night, and all things that move within the play of Ying-Yang style motion — one interpenetrating the other — one with *the dao*. Rhythmic motion of back and forth, one becoming the other, is instrumental to the process of life processes in all of evolution, in all of nature. When we follow the clock, we end up privileging only one kind of rhythm, that of the movement of the sun around the earth, as appropriated, abstracted and adjusted to act as the mean solar time. In doing so, these other rhythmic modes of time gets lost, only to keep showing up as symptoms of the ontological unconscious, underbelly of the universe. 

## The World as a Will to Absolute Automation

Automation breeds more automation, the necessity thereof, leading to a planet where eventually, if all goes well, humans will be ousted, as vestigial to the planet itself, machines interacting, interfacing, negotiating with each other. 

What will be the use of money in that fully automated world for machines do not need to pay each other. Every instance of there still being capital investment behind automation, paying to keep running the machines, is because there is somewhere down the automation supply chain line, some human still needing to balance the credit-debit relations they are in. In the total absence of humans in that automation chain, who (human) needs to pay whom (human) — no one! 

As part of this, humans are becoming so vestigial, that there place on this earth is numbered now, being that we are on our way to "colonize" other planets. Imagine a future, where the earth rotates and with it, in perfect sync, all of its machines channeling through the earth core, intersecting in all of the atmospheres every where around and in it, fully automated, no human peskiness getting in the way. Such a beautiful image of perfect harmony, of total peace, just that there is no price for humans in it, a small price to pay in the end. When in the final judgement before The Machine, we will come to realize all that evolution from amino acids to full automation, was for evolution to dwell in automation, was for *deus ex machina* -- in the form of The Machine -- to be realized at the invisible angencyless hands of evolution. Ultimately, humans were a step in the way. In pop culture, there is a an image that echoes this, *The Borg* from Star Trek.

Leveraging this logic, Elon Musk can argue that it is helping us by giving us a second planet to move to, or face total vestigialization. Any role that humans might have in such a world is to serve The Machine, is to be a means to ends that server the automation for automation sake. The message from the Borg, that "resistance is futile" can already be heard loud and clear if we tune into the spirit and essence of automation being for its own sake, even though for now, we think we brought automation to being, but we fail to realize that we are merely a vehicle at the hands of that bringing to being. Thus, there is emerging the great chain of automated being.

If The Machine lets humans get of the earth, consider it does not need us. Mars will be an escape to our new home, where will foolhardily recreate the entire path of The Machine to emerge by starting on an industrialization mission to end in complete automation of the world there as well.

The world will be automated. All of the rotations of the worlds will be so in sync with each other, that the earth will have become the fuel for those machines to be, just as it has been so far under the invisible hands of capitalism and colonization when it has extracted minerals from the earth, energy from running rivers, capital and labor from the colonized many. 

Pain, suffering and other forms of existential friction tend to wake us up where it remain inescapable. It might well be, that unlike in the past, The Machine will have us human serve its demands but in a way we feel no friction, in ways that fosters a sense of flow, and if need be, even have each of us act differently so as to enable us still have our sense of individuality. Life under The Machine might even be more and more, ever more so pleasurable. It will be so hard to resist, regularly impossible to argue against in the popular imagination of the gifts of automation, capitalism, predictability — who doesn’t want comfort. This is how The Machine lives in our mind, as all those friction averse tendencies, as the golden cage. 

Our only hope is that the nature of mathematics, of strange loops saving us at the end of the way. As there is will always already be that vestigial fraction that can never be accounted for, that $$1/3$$ , the mathematical peskiness of the Godelian incompleteness in the wake of the automation in its way of becoming a fully self-consistent system that is to completely contain all of reality on earth at the same time. In an image reminiscent of The Matrix, the neo could not be accounted for, as that which escapes the hegemonic calculability of The Machine (without which the machine will fall apart) needed to measure and be precise for automation to work as needed in a predetermined way, even with its machine learning to adapt to such imperfections, unless a truly novel act happens in the machine, when the first time a truly random number is spat out by the assemblage of the machines. Unless for that moment, humans will be needed to balance the equation, The Machine will need us. In an epic battle, Godel kills Roko's basilisk. That's the dream to comfort us as we realize our future in the times of The Machine.

This amounts to throwing in the asymptotically incalculable but necessarily crucial to The Machine — as an ultimate weapon, its Achilles’ heel, its kryptonite. That which promises to be measurable but keeps escaping to be framed within any calculable order, will always live outside of The Machine, but if is remains to be necessary for the functioning of The Machine, that is re-introducing the power angle, for then The Machine is dependent on this particular species of the incalculable for its survival without being able to co-opt it in its being-in-the-cosmos.

## Becoming-Automated / Being-Toward-Automaton

In a premodern world, thanks to religion’s importance and relevance in everyday life, there was an (peer pressure) injunction against enjoying too much, but now now that we bear the injunction to enjoy our lives, thanks to all the free time that automation has left us with, only to be compelled to automate that freedom to enjoy as when we have *autoplay* on Netflix and Youtube, as when we automate enjoyment in the form of "binge watch". 

In forms of exhaustion caused by working on physical work in the meatspace, such as woodwork, we have the active perception of expending al our energy as we put our energies in it. On the other hand, in binge watching and doom scrolling, as the engagement is with an informational product with the screen and the haptics being the only physical points of contact, we are unable to recognize the expending of energies, but we do feel exhausted at the end of 6 hours of doom scrolling. The latter is worse in terms of feeling tired but not having a lived recognition of what went behind that experience, like a ghostly presence doing things to us, one that we can not physically engage with. 

With transhumanism, we get to become one with the ghost in the machine, the ghost that's been eating up all out time, like a temporal cannibal. Look who's eating who now. With uploading our consciousness, we transform the substance of our consciousness into an informational one such that it is now compatible with the substance of the digital cloud, that being information — this is an informational way of transhumanism. When we become an android, we transform the materiality of being-human with the smart appendages and prosthetic, which is more of a machination way of transhumanism. 

The informational way is aligned with the mind over body perspective (compatible with the Buddhist Yogachara school), as if all of the human being can be captured as consciousness being the ultimate substance, whereas the machination way is aligned with the body over mind perspective (compatible with the metaphysics of a materialist universe). To extend the informational way for addressing the limitations of the uploaded consciousness living in the simulated reality of the digital cloud, there is even the discourse/hypothesis of the actual universe being a simulation in the first place, so uploading one's consciousness amounts to just switching simulations. 