---
layout: post
title: "0.1 Time mediated life"
subtitle: "How did we experience the moments that now seem to go on for too long or last all too short in a time long long ago back when clocks were not yet invented? Do we still retain glimpses of those temporally innocent times?"
permalink: /01/
date: 2021-02-08
cover-img: /images/series-01.jpg
thumbnail-img: /images/series-01.jpg
share-img: /images/series-01.jpg
number: 1
show_excerpt: true
tags: [time]
authors: [Egregore]
---

## Time, neither via clocks, nor via experience

Arguing for a language of time that is not wholly determined by clock-time, but by heterodox means of perceiving the passage of time, such as the many subjective moves of time moving slower or faster, often leads to incorrectly basing such an argument on dichotomy of objective (a la clock-time) versus subjective time (how we are feeling the passage of time). This is part of a general move when referring to expressions of — our relationship toward, negotiating with — time in terms of time being an object of our experience, especially in terms of the passage of time, how it makes us feel, the ways it leaves it trace. However, we must resist such framing of how time presents itself in our lives as being primarily a matter of experience lest we want to privilege the psychologizing (being an experience) of time over its political and economic aspects. 

In our thinking while looking to address questions on time and technics, we can never be careful enough not to fall for such dichotomies as to the personal versus the political, as if there is an "inner" world apart from, detachable from, the world at large, the world of other people, of objects, things and news events. What such dichotomies reveal is that we ought to direct our any inquiry in ways that resist the subject-object dichotomy in the first place, of me the human subject feeling the passing of time, as the the object of inquiry, such that the object plays out somewhere between the subject’s two ears. 

Instead that whole psychological casting of any inquiry on time need to be thought in terms of questions around our political freedoms and economic compromises. Each step of the way, it comes to our attention that each side of such dichotomies always and necessarily “infects” the other, which implies that an opposition consisting in two pure poles separated by an indivisible line never exists. 


## On the theological becoming of clock-time

How did it happen that when the first clock was invented we knew it is giving the right time, because there was no other clock to compare it to. We ultimately based it on our collective and shared perception of the sun going up and going down in the sky, on the day and night cycle, something that was obvious to everybody such that everyone could agree to.

Clocks measure movement with consistency such that it can eventually be agreed to as a group in a public space, but ultimately it goes back to our place as a species being earthbound, dictated by the diurnal cycles, watching the sun go up and down, while seasons changing every few months. Clocks help reify this collective perception of time in an objective scale, so we can coordinate our life around it sharing this environment of life together, and to so this, we have formalized time under the epistemic cage of regular repeated consistent movement. But time in its everyday expression, especially in the privacy of our consciousness, and the language of art, is far more wild and uncaged.

What started as a formalization of time under the commonly observed movement of the sun, become the only mode of time, when that sun movement got captured and formalized inside the epistemic cage that is the sundial clock. As that was the only time that we all of us could agree on publicly in unison (being observable outside in nature common to all), we started discounting all private forms of time perception. Soon this one mode of time, the clock measurable one, became the way trades are organized, large groups we coordinated, such as the case with the Church clock (with its bells) being at the center of every town, helping set the rhythm of life for the entire village, while the Church also having the graveyard next to it, signifying the end of time for everyone. 

The Benedictine monks were the first organized groups of any significant influence who started regimenting their everyday life based on the clock-time, while actively disregarding their bodily urges to eat when hungry and sleep when tired, as desires taking them away from G-d's path of harmonious life, but not a chaotic ecological harmony but a concocted one, one of the mechanical, one which demands we organize life into functions. Because of which, they were the first most successful at scaling their religion, way more than the Jews. With the protestant reformation, this clock based temporal regimentation of life got democratized for the lay people in accordance with Martin Luther's promise to make every man his own priest. Eventually, its effects can be seen in all spheres of life, from the coal mines of Germany, to the Dutch and English East India Company, following which, with the advent of modernism, this regimentation got systematized at the invisible hands of the capital, that we now refer to as the Scientific Management Theory, which gets indoctrinated in the hearts and minds of business leaders when they are in Business School. 

As per Catholic theology and the protestant theology of Newton, G-d took the form of the Cosmic Timekeeper operating a Creation that was mechanical and harmonious in a clockwork way, all of the pieces of it carefully planned to work in sync with each other. Synchronization in all aspects of life, as it has become such a high concern in all walks of life, especially in our ever increasing complex and connected world of such things as information, capital, labor, geopolitics, is made possible following the clock measurable time winning out over all other modes of time, and then being crowned as the ultimate form of harmony in form of a clockwork economy, law, theology, information networks. In project management, we pay homage to this specter by surrendering to roadmaps. An alternative, more of a multi-modal temporal way of doing it would be to sketch non and multi linear narratives that keep escaping the modernist trap of progress — basically, a multi-modal map of the realities of whatever tasks we are engaged in. 

Only G-d can judge us when our time is up, when the judgement day is here — such a framing gets materialized every time we obsess over the minute details that goes in the grand project of synchronizing all of our realities, be it by giving it a consistent meaning, or by ensuring interoperability between all aspects of our lifeworld. 


## Trading time

Objects are ex-tended in space, thoughts are in-tended in mind. Or, so we are told!

By that token, time is at-tended if and when we pay heed to it. There has been a currency of capital in terms of how it replenishes those who provide it with labor, that by a salary, by a return-on-investment, by a payoff, but in all this, it makes it so following that we can all compare all such labor, even for those which needs not effort, such as watching TV or sleeping, as if it was worth it in the light of so many other things "one could have done during that same time". That sameness in time, being a factor of imagined overlap happens so based on the common unit of comparison, time on your watch.

What if the other thing we chose not to do during the same time, did not even, and wouldn’t have, occurred in the same *type* of time, being of a different modality, as per the texture, direction, speed, and color of that time. Time with kids has a very different color than time finishing a deadline — not comparable, unless we reduce such differences in the type/mode of time under the rubric of a clock time that is given/dictated as per the politics of who gets to decide whose conception of time. When your work does not give you parental leave once you have a new born, they are also playing on the politics of time, as they just made your count your time with your child in a rather objective way where it is always the firm whose time demands comes out at the top. 

No way to trade your time between options that don’t dwell in the same modality of time — classic interoperability situation here with the multiplicity of time. However, our politics is here to give us every reason to rationalize our choices (econ alert) and for that we need to violently at times, keep ~~(re)~~convincing ourselves that those are such mere subjective modes, you merely thought it look way longer to work for x than when you played chess with your friend, just check your watch. If time even gets framed under the aims of objectivity, we have relegated all of life as mechanical processes where we are machines as are all living beings.

Machine learning and algorithmic control and surveillance will work with much less effectiveness as long as we allowed ourselves to leave the time passing through/as these many modalities, some dreamtime, many psychedelic, mostly escaping any attempts at calculability — there exists time that can not be reduced to any number, denying the "how long?" question, but reveals itself in a gesture, a hand wave, a magic charm, an unintelligible incantation, some poems, in silent retreats, in that one look/gaze of love, in that furry feeling of petting your dear cat, asking your kid to repeat that politely this time.


## Time and/as meaning: Free time

If clock measurable time is the only time, then any time raising kids is a waste, any time cooking our own meal is a waste. 

To the clock, every second is equal to every other second, that is by design, since it has to maintain the exact same speed of the movement of its hands. Such temporal perfection removes any space for the qualifying certain stretches of second, minutes and hours as special, as being qualitatively different from others. On the level of a clock only reality, nothing new every happens in life, not in terms of what can be recorded by the clock alone. This happens to be a virtue when we depict the time as the X-axis, being objective, always moving the same irrespective of what’s happening in space, which is consequently taken as the Y-axis, being the one that varies. On the level of the clock, novelty — that is, the appearance of the new happening in a new/fresh moment — always remains outside of the clock representation of time, novelty is to be delegated to the spatial representations. This gets translated to the strict causality cosmology, where every effect is always already completely present in the cause, without it, the strict determinism would be the lacking since it is the cause and only that, which is to be the cause of the effect. In a totally deterministic universe, novelty is absent as immanent to time itself, and that is how causality, which is framed in the image of clock time, maintains its rationale. 

However,  if life is eventually — as if we are looking back from our death bed — causally determined, that is, composed of units of clock-only measurable time only, it would be a record of our own lifetime lacking any qualifications unique to every moment we lived. Looking back, our life would be devoid of any novelties, everything being causally deterministic in the strictest sense. In that case, we might as well automate it as the best way to pass ~~out~~ all such time, then we ought to let machines do it all on our behalf. Within such a deterministic universe, all our actions will lack any free will, for our will will be devoid of novelty, and so never creative. 

This becomes ever revealed when we are in a dull phase of passivity, as lacking creative endeavors, we let machines and circumstances dictate our next move, such as the behavioral rewards that determine our lack of will when it has surrendered to the act of doom-scrolling. Without the mind numbing hegemony of total automation when we are *hooked,* we would feel bored many a moments. Boredom is our free-will asking of us to find avenues to actualize its freedom, its the desire for desire.   

> The time that a man may call his own, that is his life.
> <cite>Charles Lamb</cite>

If too many moments succeed one another without any novelty breaking such a *flow* for too long as we wait for inspiration to strike, hoping that will do the trick, wake us up from the looking at the screen, we are then desiring for a desire to come along and sweep us off our feet, that is the desire to be creative, to make/invite something new. If all that we feel in our sense of time lacks the apperception of qualitativeness, one that separates two moments of the same duration by quality, not quantity alone, then we are always at a risk of never getting bored to even be able to go through it to eventually find our passions for the new and the weird. Even the weird is then plastic image of what has been decided by an algorithm as what my past behavioral data has deemed to be weird. 

We feel this at all times, as we keep checking our watches, impatiently looking at the file being downloaded, the delivery from my an online buy not yet reached our address — such feelings must be avoided at all cost, unlock the phone and start swiping, scrolling, surfing till we are too exhausted or called by a task that is yet to be automated away out of our lives. We are terrified of being bored, lest we find out what lies beyond, creativity, for what lies between us and the fear of boredom are the infinite promise of techno-optimism in the form of that next click or scroll.

The only moments that remain truly for us, ones that we would choose to keep for our own spending, ones where no automation will promise us any better alternative, are ones where we remain outside the economics of: clock-time running out so let’s automate, optimize and disavow boredom. In those moments that escape the clock-time, we no longer feel the neurotic inertia of calculating the passage of time with respect to what we are getting in return. We do not make love with one eye on the wrist watch, timing every move, neither do we keep looking at the clock while jamming yet not miss the time signatures of the music we are making. Therein lies that other order of time, one that manifests in the many modalities of time that escape the escapement mechanism of clocks. 


## The many modes of times shrunk under the specter of boredom

Ultimately, the question of automation is one of meaningful passing of time for if we pass time without meaning, technology promises to take that time away by automating all such tasks, thereby freeing us to engage in only meaningful acts. This is the beauty and fortune that techno-optimists see in automation. What is missing in this vision, is the never ending drive crawling under our skin and in all of culture to disavow, even reprimand, all modes and experiences of the passing of time that is not mediated (defined and framed) via clocks. This is when we tell ourselves such things as it sure *feels* like the it took a long time for the extremely hot sizzler to cool down a bit so we could bite into it, longer than it took to place the order for that sizzler. 

We have evolved to have more faith in clocks to tell us time, under the ideology that that which clocks don't measure is not time, a mere illusion of it, even though all our lives we do experience time differently, such as when we are impatient, or regretful, or excited, even though we have to keep waging this battle against our experience of time to let the clock reign supreme at the end, even though when a passing of time really means something powerful, it is never based on the clock time that makes it so, in fact, it is inspite of it. 


## Life under the Info-Blitz

There's been a speeding up of delivery/consumption of information that free to create, free to consume, thanks to neo-liberalism, has necessitated. As Neil Postman notes in the 60's the frame rate of TV is much higher than any previous rate of new information coming at us, such as with telegraph or telephone. As we get used to this higher speed, we tend to get bored easily. This has been exacerbated with the web, such as the case with jump cuts in popular Youtube videos, or people listening to podcasts at 2x the speed, or neurotically checking our messaging and email app on our phone for something new and exciting, yet ironically we are bombarded with an info-blitz every second, but without it, we feel we will be bored to death.

Consider an ubiquitous technology, the email, when it came into our lives, it was meant to make it easier to mail each other, but now just look at the amount emails we receive, thanks to spam we have to no time left to attend to the emails we would like to. The same goes for primary/everyday tools we use unless we learn to carefully limit our exposure. We are running out of time, out of breath — any moment spent not being under the influence of something we are consuming, turns into boredom. Its as if we save time to be able to spend it in employing tools that save more time, that is the vicious cycle which underpins our technologically mediated lives. This is experienced as a kind of a undercurrent that's almost always pervading throughout our being-in-the- world in the form of the rising phenomenon of ADHD.

The more years we live, the more we loose the time left to live, but if we never even lived our life lost in distraction at the service of the temporal cannibal, all that lost time comes back in front of us crystalized into a wall standing between us and our being-toward-death. 


## Cyberspace: Where hypertime is hypermedia 

Tabs in browsers allow us to do more things at the same time. Like you had multiple things happening in their own tab worlds, their own manifestation of cyberspace. You could switch between tabs, you had more flexibility.

The web with its hypermedia situates the netizen in a non-linear narrative, which is due the links and the interactivity between pages and the rabbits holes that it fosters and invites. This got amplified with the introduction of Tabs in the Opera browser, which did give the notion of saving-that-rabbit-for-latter-so-tucked-in-another-tab, but eventually, like the in case of the proliferation of omni-automation, led to parallel flows of non-linear time, so now it is not only that cyberspace time goes forward and backward and in between other time flows within a single webpage (considering each webpage as its own time narrative) but that there are multiple such non-linear time flows at the same time waiting to be explored as they are tucked away in the 30 other tabs currently open. That brings us back to the ghostly presence of these other hypertimes, as a 'I could very well click on that tab and get lost in that hypertime rabbit hole' — the possibilities therein are always already calling us, not letting us stay put with all out attention in this one tab which was anyways difficult being that even a single tab dwells in a hypertime cyberspace, thanks to hypertext media format.

When we factor in the above phenomenological experience that we as netizens have of multiple hypertimes, to temporal cannibalism of the omni-automation, thanks to software eating up the world every more so, we get the image and expression of phenomenological death, as we find our being pulled in million directions, only some real, while most of them as an imagined impossible, the many other could-have-surfed hypertime cyberspaces. With push notifications, we do not have to anymore go to the cyberspace, it doesn't just keep coming knocking at the doors of our consciousness, rather we keep finding cyberspace seated deep in the heart of our being-toward-death. We no longer get to visit and inhabit cyberspace inasmuch as it never leaves us like the ghost that predated our birth following us every step of our lives.