---
title: Adversarial Design
excerpt: In regular design work, the idea of the product is taken as a given, with the work that remains to be done, as what is to be legitimized as design, is that of realizing that idea into a reality.
author: Ann Brody, Anuj Das Gupta, and Stephen Farrugia
date: 2020-11-15
note: This is an unfinished work of genius
---

In regular design work, the idea of the product is taken as a given, with the work that remains to be done, as what is to be legitimized as design, is that of realizing that idea into a reality. That idea of the product -- both in terms of the necessity of the product to exist, and as what the product is about -- has already been decided upon, is no more of question, thereby, leaving the work of the designer as primarily helping to realize that potential behind the idea to the actuality of the real product. 

Take an iconic product: the pen. Its early 1960's in NASA, and a designer there has been asked to design a pen for low gravity to be used in space [though this is an apocryphal story, let's consider this]. This means the designer receives from the given, that there is already a necessity for writing with a pen in space, and the substance for that design object, being the pen, has also been decided. All that is left for her to do is design the eventual form it will take, or what changes to make to the existing substance of the pen. Instead of all this, how about the designer, puts to question all that has been given to her in the first place! That might lead to the eventual answer being that not a pen, but a pencil will be a better tool to be used. Unless, design is able to question what has been given as the idea for a product, the work will always be constrained in a way that will be incapable of delivering on its promise.

This can be unpacked by looking at the design process as four sides of quadrant (inspired by Aristotle’s four causes):

- 9 O'clock: Antecedent design (Source of change): What initiated that design of the product? Need to go to space
- 3 O'clock: Teleological design (Destination of change): What is the purpose (telos) that design will serve? Taking notes in space
- 6 O'clock: Substantive design: What constitutes, as a substance, that product? Whatever pens are made of
- 12 O'clock: Procedural design: How would the form factor be, the look, shape and feel? Texture for the pen, its shape, its buttons.

The NASA designer was given the first three as static, as pre-decided, she could only work on the last one. That was a dead end. Instead when she looked at the Antecedent and Teleological design factors that she realized that there needs to be a rethinking of the Substantive design factor, that maybe a pen is not the best substance to be used in space, and hence, with a better route for design to eventually open it up for the idea of a pencil to come about as the solution. Once, the new substance has been chosen, only then can the designer go ahead and work on the procedural design, like designing a rubber wrapper for the pencil to make it easier to hold onto.

What she employed it, we call it adversarial design: we are adversarial to what's given in the first place, not accepting it as a default to then base all the analysis and creativity on top of that. This amounts to questioning the idea of the product -- both in terms of the necessity of the product to exist (via the antecedent design and the teleological design), and as what the product is about (via the substantive design). Once we are in dialogue with the idea through the antecedent/teleological/substantive lens, only then can we base any procedural design on top of that. This is done by interrogating, intervening any design exercise with clients, and other critical stakeholders with the question: What would be missing in the world if this product never got realized? This acknowledges that every stakeholder has their own worldview, while lending itself towards a crisis perspective in terms of the "missing in the world" angle

However, designers can not afford to be adversarial towards the given, the idea, of the product, if it has been given by the company at large for which they are working for, especially, when the problems with the idea are not so much with the business value but in regards to its upholding the interests and rights of the users at the cost of the business. This is especially pertinent if a designer is to call oneself a User Experience designer, for what is morally problematic is thinking one has design, and in turn decide upon, how a user will experience a product, due to its invasive nature of that very design posture. Rather, adversarial design can shine a light on this aspect of design, by pointing out that an UX designer, ought to focus on upholding the interests and rights of the user over and above of the business. That would amount to not deciding upon, but enabling, fostering a semiotic space for users to make sense of their use and interaction with a product. 

Consider the case of a Nestle designer working on Nespresso, where the company wants to make new machines connected to the Internet. The UX designer, if she is to be true to her title ought to be adversarial towards the idea of that new product line by asking “what would be missing in the world of the Nespresso user if this new product line never existed?” This is in line with taking the user’s side first and foremost for then one can call oneself an UX designer, lest one will be a business experience designer. Basically, UX designers have to stand in for the user, represent the rights of the user, even make design decisions such that the user can voice her dispute if and when the product fails to respect that user’s experience. 

However, this is not possible as a product designer can not afford to engage in an adversarial posture towards the very business that pays her salary, not being able challenge the idea that given from that business, for the given, the idea comes under the transactional burden of salary for the design work. As a result, designers need to unionize, not just within a company, but among each other across companies as a kind of a DAO for a design houses that will then lend its designers on a contractual basis to these businesses.