---
layout: layouts/article.liquid
title: "1.0 No time to die"
excerpt: "Without the epistemic hegemony of the clock measurable time in our lifeworld, death would have a different meaning"
permalink: /10/
author: Egregore
date: 2021-02-11
image: /images/series-10.jpg
number: 1
show_excerpt: false
tags:
  - death
---

## Being towards death
Without the epistemic hegemony of the clock measurable time in our lifeworld, death would have a different meaning. We would no longer have the linearity of the singular arrow of time that has only one final end, being death, as the eventuality of all eventualities, while it as its beginning with our birth. Thus, the specter of being toward death haunts all of life under such a temporal regime. Instead if we could recognize the passing of time in all its colors, as a multiplicity, such that some of those have their own start and end separate from the clock measurable one — little strands of times as it incarnates in one of its many ~~(subjective)~~ modalities, more a  temporal spaghetti all in all.

Our gripping fear of death is an expression of our total surrender to this one mode of time, being that of the clock measurable, and thus, linear and singular, as the only one as being “real” time, while trying to fight against any instinct at paying attention to other modes of times. 

It is not just that time feels like moving/happening differently to different people based on where/who they are, but that for the same person, one does not inhabit an ultimately singular, albeit subjectively variant, time as the metaphysical ground underlying all the many different modalities of time. Even for a single person, there are many modes of being in time that come/happen to being, not all of which remain reducible, or in fact, translatable in any meaningful way, to the clock measurable time. These many modes of time presents itself through/as their own distinct flow of time with its signature qualities as recognized when we pay attention to it. Some of these modes also intersect with some of other, such as in dream time and psychedelic moments of passing the many times crossing each other.

## But machines never die…
All this saving-time neurosis is driven by the eventual desire to have enough time left to live our life for, our time is limited, thanks to death. If only there be no death looming over us like a ghost that came to existence the moment we came to existence for that which has never been born can not die, for to be born is to start the process of dying, albeit slowly in 80 or so years. 

To want to be immortal is in that way, denying the fact that one was ever born, is to make the metaphysical claim that one is timeless, that one is like the machine that can be created, not a human that gets to be born, and hence, can be fixed, as long as it does not get broken (for machines don't die, they break, they get decommissioned... for machines get created, they are not born).


## The Two Modes of Coping with Temporal Poverty
What it means to find oneself in a state of temporal poverty is that we want to make the most of our time for we feel we do not have enough, but that desire to maximize our utility of time makes the state of poverty worse. 

**We engage in two primary modes of such maximization: automation, and multitasking.** The former means we outsource our task to an automaton or another person. The latter means that we try to do multiple things at the same, such as listening to a podcast while driving, or checking your text while you're driving, even though some of which, the last one here, could be detrimental for time -- the lack thereof -- is our great enemy in such an endeavor. However, tasks that  demand (operate on) different kinds of attentional space, such as visual and verbal, can be done parallelly to a certain extent. Basically, as long as the tasks at hand do not break the rhythm of the media ecology continuum, such that they do not dwell in the same media space but are spread out in the media spectrum, operate within spectrum, the space of which allows for the switching to happen at a low or negligible cost provided it stays within the confines of such a continuum.

On the other hand, when the rhythm is not respected, that breeds a sense of paranoia of the ghost of switching costs haunting our every task well before we decided or desired to switch to another task. We do this by keeping the options open to always be able to switch easily, such as by carrying multiple devices, or by having multiple tabs open in a single browser, just a click away to activate one of them, but this makes each tab that much more fraught with the invitational desire from those other tabs asking to be activated as well, thereby resulting in no particular tab getting the attention it seeks. As part of this paranoia, even if a device or a tab is not calling for our attention by ringing a notification, we have internal urges now they we are driven by the anxiety of not having enough time left, not wanting to miss out on the what some of the other tasks might offer, we actively keep opening new tabs, thereby making it more difficult to decide between tasks. Saving tabs by multitasking, when not respective the ecology of media, is always already a vicious cycle.

The more we loose time while and due to switching between tasks, the more time it takes to get settled in the task being switched to, and the lesser the quality/depth of the attention that we have in this new task -- This counterproductive movement applies all tasks that we eventually switch to and are engaged in at any moment. Further, even the task of switching tasks is that, another task to be attended to, dealt with, expended mental energy on.

## Crypto & Extropianism: Time is Money, Money is Time
> The future lies open before us. We shall try to do better than we have done in the past, for we have time now... time to get things right, time to get things right, to grow up, time to learn from our mistakes. Let all the bells in the kingdom ring until midnight, in remembrance of our dead. Then after, we will celebrate and begin the process of building a better world... for we have time now.
> <cite><a href="https://youtu.be/cZYNADOHhVY?t=714">Propaganda arguing for the death of death AKA “The Fable of the Dragon-Tyrant”</a></cite>

The future lies open before us. We shall try to do better than we have done in the past, for we have time now... time to get things right, time to get things right, to grow up, time to learn from our mistakes. Let all the bells in the kingdom ring until midnight, in remembrance of our dead. Then after, we will celebrate and begin the process of building a better world... for we have time now.
Saving time is saving labor, even beyond the automation perspective, but is the case as well behind the logic of fighting spam using hashcash (that enforces spammers to spend their hard earned, hence scarce, time computing something), which is the same logic as employed in CAPTCHA making us do work that only a human can do, while we waste the time clicking on images feeling fidgety as we can not wait to get this 2 seconds of CAPTCHA over. This logic eventually morphed into a much bigger system, in the form of Proof of Work (PoW).

In Bitcoin, the system adjusts the difficulty to solve the PoW puzzle every 2016 blocks (every 2 weeks approximately) in order to keep the average time between successive blocks to 10 minutes. Here, time being of scarcity, in terms of the time spent in solving the puzzle so as to be the first one in time to do so, is of essence to win the reward of the coinbase transaction. The real scarcity that gives Bitcoin and all crypto its value is that of the scarcity of time-to-live for all human agents in possession of crypto. Without this temporal scarcity, the incentives would not be compatible, for there would be the libidinal desire to *hodl* crypto: hold on for dear life — for life comes with limited time offer, except of course for the extropian promise which will deliver us to have all the time in the world to keep holding forever. The real promise, the unspoken, inarticulated, even contradictory one, behind *hodl*, is that it demands a holding forever, inspite of its purported discourse on spending it when all fiat has fallen. For the true believer, nothing could get so fallen that it will demand a hodler to stoop so low as to spend their crypto and make their crypto look and act like fiat money that is spendable. 

The value that is then associated in terms of the price of crypto becomes responsible in keeping the extropian dream alive in two ways:

1. As is the case with Hal Finney, there is incentive for future generations to revive him when they can cure his ALS syndrome so he can then unlock some Bitcoins, which only he can do as the private key is locked in his memories, (as long as Bitcoin is be a high value), to be paid to those who cured him. This ensures his body be preserved properly and that people are on the lookout for a cure.
2. Crypto whales can donate large sums of money to those who are researching life extension science.

It is no coincidence that crypto has a deep connection with extropians, it is in fact a necessary one, even an ironic one at that: The very element of temporal cannibalism that made PoW possible, made some dream of extropian futures, and thanks to the PoW, they can attempt to make that dream come true — circular, more so spiral, logic at that.

When time is money, it makes for the desire to have more time, and thus, extropianism is here to ensure that. If money is time, then crypto is here to tokenize all that time.


## Timechain: Chaining time lest death take it away
Finally in terms of *crypto*, it is no coincidence that the logic of immutability, in many ways serving as one of its defining characteristics, follows the logic of a linear time, one that goes from past to future with no way turning back time. The locus of this logic as it applies to consensus protocols, is less on the directionality, but more on the twin factors of: there being a single timeline, hence, only one canonical chain; and, there being no turning back time, and thus, no transaction rollbacks. To this effect, Nakamoto had once referred to what eventually came to be known by the moniker, "blockchain" as a *timechain*.


> Nodes collect new transactions into a block, hash them into a hash tree, and scan through nonce values to make the block’s hash satisfy proof-of-work requirements. When they solve the proof-of-work, they broadcast the block to everyone and the block is added to the timechain. The first transaction in the block is a special one that creates a new coin owned by the creator of the block.
> <cite><a href="https://github.com/bitcoinsSG/timechain/blob/d4c7befc45bef0ad737b78afa0ccbb43e3410a38/all-of-satoshis-data/code/bitcoin-nov08-tgz/main.h#L722">Satoshi Nakamoto</a></cite>

In a rather bizzare twist of fate, the immutability regime ends up giving us a respite from the many hypertimes that underpins our cyberspace realities, all the while crypto being firmly a phenomenon of cyberspace in its cypherpunk incarnation.  Looking for the nonce, running mega expensive computation to do so, publishing your competing block, constitutes the rebel act of getting to construct your timeline.  But by making each timeline pay for its being in terms of the lost but enormous hashpower needed to back that since only a single chain wins at in the long run, making others loose their hashpower, and hence loose their construction of time.